Dasharatha was the king of Ayodhya. Dasharatha had three wives: Kaushalya Kaikeyi and Sumitra. He was childless for a long time and anxious to produce an heir so he performs a fire sacrifice known as putra-kameshti yagya. As a consequence Rama is first born to Kaushalya  Bharatha is born to Kaikeyi Lakshmana and Shatrughna are born to Sumitra. These sons are endowed to various degrees with the essence of the Supreme Trinity Entity Vishnu; Vishnu had opted to be born into mortality to combat the demon Ravana who was oppressing the gods and who could only be destroyed by a mortal. The boys are reared as the princes of the realm receiving instructions from the scriptures and in warfare from Vasishta. When Rama is 16 years old sage Vishwamitra comes to the court of Dasharatha in search of help against demons who were disturbing sacrificial rites. He chooses Rama who is followed by Lakshmana his constant companion throughout the story. Rama and Lakshmana receive instructions and supernatural weapons from Vishwamitra and proceed to destroy the demons.

Janaka was the king of Mithila. One day a female child was found in the field by the king in the deep furrow dug by his plough. Overwhelmed with joy the king regarded the child as a "miraculous gift of god". The child was named Sita the Sanskrit word for furrow. Sita grew up to be a girl of unparalleled beauty and charm. The king had decided that who ever could lift and wield the heavy bow presented to his ancestors by Shiva could marry Sita. Sage Vishwamitra takes Rama
 and Lakshmana to Mithila to show the bow. Then Rama desires to lift it and goes on to wield the bow and when he draws the string it breaks.[10] Marriages are arranged between the sons of Dasharatha and daughters of Janaka. Rama gets married to Sita Lakshmana to Urmila  Bharatha to Mandavi and Shatrughna to Shrutakirti. The weddings are celebrated with great festivity in Mithila and the marriage party returns to Ayodhya.

Ayodhya Kanda

Gold carving depiction of the legendary Ayodhya at the Ajmer Jain temple.
After Rama and Sita have been married for twelve years an elderly Dasharatha expresses his desire to crown Rama to which the Kosala assembly and his subjects express their support. On the eve of the great event Kaikeyi – her jealousy aroused by Manthara a wicked maidservant – claims two boons that Dasharatha had long ago granted her. Kaikeyi demands Rama to be exiled into the wilderness for fourteen years while the succession passes to her son  Bharatha. The heartbroken king constrained by his rigid devotion to his given word accedes to Kaikeyi demands. Rama accepts his father reluctant decree with absolute submission and calm self-control which characterises him throughout the story. He is joined by Sita and Lakshmana. When he asks Sita not to follow him she says "the forest where you dwell is Ayodhya for me and Ayodhya without you is a veritable hell for me." After Rama departure King Dasharatha unable to bear the grief passes away. Meanwhile  Bharatha who was on a visit to his maternal uncle learns about the events in Ayodhya.  Bharatha refuses to profit from his mother wicked scheming and visits Rama in the forest. He requests Rama to return and rule. But Rama determined to carry out his father orders to the letter refuses to return before the period of exile.


Rama leaving for fourteen years of exile from Ayodhya.

Ravana fights Jatayu as he carries off the kidnapped Sita. Painting by Raja Ravi Varma
After thirteen years of exile Rama Sita and Lakshmana journey southward along the banks of river Godavari where they build cottages and live off the land. At the Panchavati forest they are visited by a rakshasi named Shurpanakha sister of Ravana. She tries to seduce the brothers and after failing attempts to kill Sita. Lakshmana stops her by cutting off her nose and ears. Hearing of this her brother Khara organises an attack against the princes. Rama defeats Khara and his raskshasas.

When the news of these events reach Ravana he resolves to destroy Rama by capturing Sita with the aid of the rakshasa Maricha. Maricha assuming the form of a golden deer captivates Sita attention. Entranced by the beauty of the deer Sita pleads with Rama to capture it. Rama aware that this is the ploy of the demons cannot dissuade Sita from her desire and chases the deer into the forest leaving Sita under Lakshmana guard. After some time Sita hears Rama calling out to her; afraid for his life she insists that Lakshmana rush to his aid. Lakshmana tries to assure her that Rama is invincible and that it is best if he continues to follow Rama orders to protect her. On the verge of hysterics Sita insists that it is not she but Rama who needs Lakshmana help. He obeys her wish but stipulates that she is not to leave the cottage or entertain any stranger. He draws a chalk outline the Lakshmana rekha around the cottage and casts a spell on it that prevents anyone from entering the boundary but allows people to exit. With the coast finally clear Ravana appears in the guise of an ascetic requesting Sita hospitality. Unaware of her guest plan Sita is tricked into leaving the rekha and is then forcibly carried away by Ravana.[11]

Jatayu a vulture tries to rescue Sita but is mortally wounded. At Lanka Sita is kept under the guard of rakshasis. Ravana asks Sita to marry him but she refuses being eternally devoted to Rama. Meanwhile Rama and Lakshmana learn about Sita abduction from Jatayu and immediately set out to save her. During their search they meet Kabandha and the ascetic Shabari who direct them towards Sugriva and Hanuman.

Kishkindha Kanda

A stone bas-relief at Banteay Srei in Cambodia depicts the combat between Vali and Sugriva (middle). To the right Rama fires his bow. To the left Vali lies dying.
Kishkindha Kanda is set in the ape (Vanara) citadel Kishkindha. Rama and Lakshmana meet Hanuman the biggest devotee of Rama greatest of ape heroes and an adherent of Sugriva the banished pretender to the throne of Kishkindha. Rama befriends Sugriva and helps him by killing his elder brother Vali thus regaining the kingdom of Kishkindha in exchange for helping Rama to recover Sita. However Sugriva soon forgets his promise and spends his time in enjoying his powers. The clever former ape queen Tara (wife of Vali) calmly intervenes to prevent an enraged Lakshmana from destroying the ape citadel. She then eloquently convinces Sugriva to honour his pledge. Sugriva then sends search parties to the four corners of the earth only to return without success from north east and west. The southern search party under the leadership of Angada and Hanuman learns from a vulture named Sampati (elder brother of Jatayu) that Sita was taken to Lanka.


Ravana is meeting Sita at Ashokavana. Hanuman is seen on the tree.
Sundara Kanda forms the heart of Valmiki Ramayana and consists of a detailed vivid account of Hanuman adventures. After learning about Sita Hanuman assumes a gargantuan form and makes a colossal leap across the sea to Lanka. On the way he meets with many challenges like facing a Gandharva kanya who comes in the form of a demon to test his abilities. He encounters a mountain named Mainakudu who offers Lord Hanuman assistance and offers him rest. Lord Hanuman refuses because there is little time remaining to complete the search for Sita.

After entering into Lanka he finds a demon Lankini who protects all of Lanka. Hanuman fights with her and subjugates her in order to get into Lanka. In the process Lankini who had an earlier vision/warning from the gods that the end of Lanka nears if someone defeats Lankini. Here Hanuman explores the demons' kingdom and spies on Ravana. He locates Sita in Ashoka grove where she is being wooed and threatened by Ravana and his rakshasis to marry Ravana. Hanuman reassures Sita giving Rama signet ring as a sign of good faith. He offers to carry Sita back to Rama; however she refuses and says that it is not the dharma stating that Ramayana will not have significance if Hanuman carries her to Rama – "When Rama is not there Ravana carried Sita forcibly and when Ravana was not there Hanuman carried Sita back to Rama". She says that Rama himself must come and avenge the insult of her abduction.

Hanuman then wreaks havoc in Lanka by destroying trees and buildings and killing Ravana warriors. He allows himself to be captured and delivered to Ravana. He gives a bold lecture to Ravana to release Sita. He is condemned and his tail is set on fire but he escapes his bonds and leaping from roof to roof sets fire to Ravana citadel and makes the giant leap back from the island. The joyous search party returns to Kishkindha with the news.


It depicts the monkey army of the protagonist Rama (top left blue figure) fighting Ravana—the demon-king of the Lanka—to save Rama kidnapped wife Sita. The painting depicts multiple events in the battle against the three-headed demon general Trisiras in bottom left. Trisiras is beheaded by Hanuman the monkey-companion of Rama.
Also known as Lanka Kanda this book describes the war between the army of Rama and the army of Ravana. Having received Hanuman report on Sita Rama and Lakshmana proceed with their allies towards the shore of the southern sea. There they are joined by Ravana renegade brother Vibhishana. The apes named Nala and Nila construct a floating bridge (known as Rama Setu)[12] across the sea using stones that floated on water because they had Rama name written on them. The princes and their army cross over to Lanka. A lengthy war ensues. During a battle Ravana son Indrajit hurls a powerful weapon at Lakshmana who is badly wounded. So Hanuman assumes a gigantic form and flies from Lanka to the Himalayas. Upon reaching Mount Sumeru Hanuman was unable to identify the herb that could cure Lakshmana and so decided to bring the entire mountain back to Lanka. Eventually the war ends when Rama kills Ravana. Rama then installs Vibhishana on the throne of Lanka.

On meeting Sita Rama asks her to undergo an Agni Pariksha (test of fire) to prove her chastity as he wants to get rid of the rumors surrounding her purity. When Sita plunges into the sacrificial fire Agni lord of fire raises Sita unharmed to the throne attesting to her innocence. The episode of Agni Pariksha varies in the versions of Ramayana by Valmiki and Tulsidas. In Tulsidas Ramacharitamanas Sita was under the protection of Agni (see Maya Sita) so it was necessary to bring her out before reuniting with Rama. At the expiration of his term of exile Rama returns to Ayodhya with Sita and Lakshmana where the coronation is performed. This is the beginning of Ram Rajya which implies an ideal state with good morals. Ramayan is not only the story about how truth defeats the evil it also teaches us to forget all the evil and arrogance that resides inside ourselves.


Dasharatha was the king of Ayodhya. He had three wives: Kaushalya Kaikeyi and Sumitra. He was childless for a long time and anxious to produce an heir so he performs a fire sacrifice known as putra-kameshti yagya. As a consequence Rama is first born to Kaushalya  Bharatha is born to Kaikeyi Lakshmana and Shatrughna are born to Sumitra. These sons are endowed to various degrees with the essence of the Supreme Trinity Entity Vishnu; Vishnu had opted to be born into mortality to combat the demon Ravana who was oppressing the gods and who could only be destroyed by a mortal. The boys are reared as the princes of the realm receiving instructions from the scriptures and in warfare from Vasishta. When Rama is 16 years old sage Vishwamitra comes to the court of Dasharatha in search of help against demons who were disturbing sacrificial rites. He chooses Rama who is followed by Lakshmana his constant companion throughout the story. Rama and Lakshmana receive instructions and supernatural weapons from Vishwamitra and proceed to destroy the demons.

Janaka was the king of Mithila. One day a female child was found in the field by the king in the deep furrow dug by his plough. Overwhelmed with joy the king regarded the child as a "miraculous gift of god". The child was named Sita the Sanskrit word for furrow. Sita grew up to be a girl of unparalleled beauty and charm. The king had decided that who ever could lift and wield the heavy bow presented to his ancestors by Shiva could marry Sita. Sage Vishwamitra takes Rama
 and Lakshmana to Mithila to show the bow. Then Rama desires to lift it and goes on to wield the bow and when he draws the string it breaks.[10] Marriages are arranged between the sons of Dasharatha and daughters of Janaka. Rama gets married to Sita Lakshmana to Urmila  Bharatha to Mandavi and Shatrughna to Shrutakirti. The weddings are celebrated with great festivity in Mithila and the marriage party returns to Ayodhya.

Ayodhya Kanda

Gold carving depiction of the legendary Ayodhya at the Ajmer Jain temple.
After Rama and Sita have been married for twelve years an elderly Dasharatha expresses his desire to crown Rama to which the Kosala assembly and his subjects express their support. On the eve of the great event Kaikeyi – her jealousy aroused by Manthara a wicked maidservant – claims two boons that Dasharatha had long ago granted her. Kaikeyi demands Rama to be exiled into the wilderness for fourteen years while the succession passes to her son  Bharatha. The heartbroken king constrained by his rigid devotion to his given word accedes to Kaikeyi demands. Rama accepts his father reluctant decree with absolute submission and calm self-control which characterises him throughout the story. He is joined by Sita and Lakshmana. When he asks Sita not to follow him she says "the forest where you dwell is Ayodhya for me and Ayodhya without you is a veritable hell for me." After Rama departure King Dasharatha unable to bear the grief passes away. Meanwhile  Bharatha who was on a visit to his maternal uncle learns about the events in Ayodhya.  Bharatha refuses to profit from his mother wicked scheming and visits Rama in the forest. He requests Rama to return and rule. But Rama determined to carry out his father orders to the letter refuses to return before the period of exile.


Rama leaving for fourteen years of exile from Ayodhya.

Ravana fights Jatayu as he carries off the kidnapped Sita. Painting by Raja Ravi Varma
After thirteen years of exile Rama Sita and Lakshmana journey southward along the banks of river Godavari where they build cottages and live off the land. At the Panchavati forest they are visited by a rakshasi named Shurpanakha sister of Ravana. She tries to seduce the brothers and after failing attempts to kill Sita. Lakshmana stops her by cutting off her nose and ears. Hearing of this her brother Khara organises an attack against the princes. Rama defeats Khara and his raskshasas.

When the news of these events reach Ravana he resolves to destroy Rama by capturing Sita with the aid of the rakshasa Maricha. Maricha assuming the form of a golden deer captivates Sita attention. Entranced by the beauty of the deer Sita pleads with Rama to capture it. Rama aware that this is the ploy of the demons cannot dissuade Sita from her desire and chases the deer into the forest leaving Sita under Lakshmana guard. After some time Sita hears Rama calling out to her; afraid for his life she insists that Lakshmana rush to his aid. Lakshmana tries to assure her that Rama is invincible and that it is best if he continues to follow Rama orders to protect her. On the verge of hysterics Sita insists that it is not she but Rama who needs Lakshmana help. He obeys her wish but stipulates that she is not to leave the cottage or entertain any stranger. He draws a chalk outline the Lakshmana rekha around the cottage and casts a spell on it that prevents anyone from entering the boundary but allows people to exit. With the coast finally clear Ravana appears in the guise of an ascetic requesting Sita hospitality. Unaware of her guest plan Sita is tricked into leaving the rekha and is then forcibly carried away by Ravana.[11]

Jatayu a vulture tries to rescue Sita but is mortally wounded. At Lanka Sita is kept under the guard of rakshasis. Ravana asks Sita to marry him but she refuses being eternally devoted to Rama. Meanwhile Rama and Lakshmana learn about Sita abduction from Jatayu and immediately set out to save her. During their search they meet Kabandha and the ascetic Shabari who direct them towards Sugriva and Hanuman.

Kishkindha Kanda

A stone bas-relief at Banteay Srei in Cambodia depicts the combat between Vali and Sugriva (middle). To the right Rama fires his bow. To the left Vali lies dying.
Kishkindha Kanda is set in the ape (Vanara) citadel Kishkindha. Rama and Lakshmana meet Hanuman the biggest devotee of Rama greatest of ape heroes and an adherent of Sugriva the banished pretender to the throne of Kishkindha. Rama befriends Sugriva and helps him by killing his elder brother Vali thus regaining the kingdom of Kishkindha in exchange for helping Rama to recover Sita. However Sugriva soon forgets his promise and spends his time in enjoying his powers. The clever former ape queen Tara (wife of Vali) calmly intervenes to prevent an enraged Lakshmana from destroying the ape citadel. She then eloquently convinces Sugriva to honour his pledge. Sugriva then sends search parties to the four corners of the earth only to return without success from north east and west. The southern search party under the leadership of Angada and Hanuman learns from a vulture named Sampati (elder brother of Jatayu) that Sita was taken to Lanka.


Ravana is meeting Sita at Ashokavana. Hanuman is seen on the tree.
Sundara Kanda forms the heart of Valmiki Ramayana and consists of a detailed vivid account of Hanuman adventures. After learning about Sita Hanuman assumes a gargantuan form and makes a colossal leap across the sea to Lanka. On the way he meets with many challenges like facing a Gandharva kanya who comes in the form of a demon to test his abilities. He encounters a mountain named Mainakudu who offers Lord Hanuman assistance and offers him rest. Lord Hanuman refuses because there is little time remaining to complete the search for Sita.

After entering into Lanka he finds a demon Lankini who protects all of Lanka. Hanuman fights with her and subjugates her in order to get into Lanka. In the process Lankini who had an earlier vision/warning from the gods that the end of Lanka nears if someone defeats Lankini. Here Hanuman explores the demons' kingdom and spies on Ravana. He locates Sita in Ashoka grove where she is being wooed and threatened by Ravana and his rakshasis to marry Ravana. Hanuman reassures Sita giving Rama signet ring as a sign of good faith. He offers to carry Sita back to Rama; however she refuses and says that it is not the dharma stating that Ramayana will not have significance if Hanuman carries her to Rama – "When Rama is not there Ravana carried Sita forcibly and when Ravana was not there Hanuman carried Sita back to Rama". She says that Rama himself must come and avenge the insult of her abduction.

Hanuman then wreaks havoc in Lanka by destroying trees and buildings and killing Ravana warriors. He allows himself to be captured and delivered to Ravana. He gives a bold lecture to Ravana to release Sita. He is condemned and his tail is set on fire but he escapes his bonds and leaping from roof to roof sets fire to Ravana citadel and makes the giant leap back from the island. The joyous search party returns to Kishkindha with the news.


It depicts the monkey army of the protagonist Rama (top left blue figure) fighting Ravana—the demon-king of the Lanka—to save Rama kidnapped wife Sita. The painting depicts multiple events in the battle against the three-headed demon general Trisiras in bottom left. Trisiras is beheaded by Hanuman the monkey-companion of Rama.
Also known as Lanka Kanda this book describes the war between the army of Rama and the army of Ravana. Having received Hanuman report on Sita Rama and Lakshmana proceed with their allies towards the shore of the southern sea. There they are joined by Ravana renegade brother Vibhishana. The apes named Nala and Nila construct a floating bridge (known as Rama Setu)[12] across the sea using stones that floated on water because they had Rama name written on them. The princes and their army cross over to Lanka. A lengthy war ensues. During a battle Ravana son Indrajit hurls a powerful weapon at Lakshmana who is badly wounded. So Hanuman assumes a gigantic form and flies from Lanka to the Himalayas. Upon reaching Mount Sumeru Hanuman was unable to identify the herb that could cure Lakshmana and so decided to bring the entire mountain back to Lanka. Eventually the war ends when Rama kills Ravana. Rama then installs Vibhishana on the throne of Lanka.

On meeting Sita Rama asks her to undergo an Agni Pariksha (test of fire) to prove her chastity as he wants to get rid of the rumors surrounding her purity. When Sita plunges into the sacrificial fire Agni lord of fire raises Sita unharmed to the throne attesting to her innocence. The episode of Agni Pariksha varies in the versions of Ramayana by Valmiki and Tulsidas. In Tulsidas Ramacharitamanas Sita was under the protection of Agni (see Maya Sita) so it was necessary to bring her out before reuniting with Rama. At the expiration of his term of exile Rama returns to Ayodhya with Sita and Lakshmana where the coronation is performed. This is the beginning of Ram Rajya which implies an ideal state with good morals. Ramayan is not only the story about how truth defeats the evil it also teaches us to forget all the evil and arrogance that resides inside ourselves.


Dasharatha king of Ayodhya had no children. So he arranged a Putra-kameshti sacrifice (putra = son kameshti = that which is desired). At the sacrifice Agni (god of fire) arose from the flames and handed the king a golden vase brimming with nectar. "Give this to your queens" said the god and disappeared. The king had three wives. To the eldest the king gave half of the nectar; the second queen got a portion that remained when the queen had drunk her half. To the youngest queen the king gave the remaining half of the nectar and again the second queen got the portion that remained. In time the queens gave birth to sons: to the eldest was born Rama to the youngest was born  Bharatha and to the second queen were born the twins Lakshmana and Shatrughna.
When the princes had grown up some the sage Vishwamitra arrived at Dasharatha court and asked that Rama and Lakshmana be "lent" to him to help him rid his hermitage of the demons that were plaguing the ashram dwellers by defiling their sacrifices with blood and bones and by killing them off. After the two princes successfully rid the ashram of the demons the sage took them to the neighbouring kingdom of Mithila to show them the swayamvar festivities of the Mithila princess Sita born of the earth. The king of that country had adopted Sita as his daughter and after Sita had grown up had declared that he would give her in marriage to anyone who could string the Great Bow of Shiva. No one could. Several kings princes and commoners had tried and failed.
The swayamvar had been in progress for several months now and the bow still remained unstrung. It was to this place that the sage Vishwamitra brought the two princes of Ayodhya. Rama and Lakshamn entered the assembly hall where the bow was displayed in all its glory. Rama walked over picked up the bow strung it and plucked the bowstring with such a twang that two things happened simultaneously: the twang was heard for miles around and the force of it broke the bow into two with so great a sound that the king and his courtiers came running from their chambers to see what the commotion was about. When the confusion had settled Rama was married to Sita. His three brothers were married to a sister and cousins of Sita and there were many festivities and much rejoicing in the two kingdoms.
Some time later Dasharatha decided he had grown too old to rule and declared he would abdicate in favour of Rama the eldest born and the crown prince. This is when his youngest queen invoked an old promise thatDasharatha had made to her: she demanded that Rama be exiled for 14 years and that her own son  Bharatha be crowned king.Dasharatha refused but Rama decided to honour his father old promise and left for the forests. He was accompanied by Sita and by Lakshmana both of whom could not be dissuaded from following him. In grief at the injustice of it all and at Rama departure Dasharatha died within two days. 
  Bharatha was not in Ayodhya when these events happened; he and the fourth prince Shatrughna were away holidaying at  Bharatha maternal grandfather country. They were summoned to Ayodhya in haste and when  Bharatha learnt what had happened he was furious. He shouted at his mother refused to ascend the throne and gathered the townsfolk around him to proceed to the forest and bring Rama back.
Rama refused to return stating his intention to serve his father last wish by being an exile for the full 14 years.  Bharatha returned with Rama sandals placed them on the throne and proceeded to rule the country in Rama name. Meanwhile Rama moved further south even deeper into the forests so that the people of Ayodhya would not find it easy to keep coming to his hut and begging him to return.
One day a demoness named Shurpanakha saw Rama and being charmed out of her wits by his beauty walked up to him and begged him to marry her. "I already have a wife" said Rama and pointed to Sita. "Why don't you marry my brother Lakshmana instead?" When Shurpanakha turned towards Lakshmana he declared he'd taken a temporary vow of celibacy and sent her back to Rama. What followed was that the brothers took turns to thus play ping-pong with her and when Shurpanakha by now angry beyond measure rushed towards Sita to kill her Lakshmana cut off Shurpanakha nose and ears. 
Shurpanakha flew towards Lanka (modern Sri Lanka) ruled by her brother Ravana and complained. Enraged Ravana vowed vengeance. He persuaded the demon Maricha to disguise himself as a golden deer and wander near Rama hut. When Sita saw the golden deer she begged Rama to get it for her. When the brothers were out pursuing the deer Ravana arrived abducted Sita placed her in his flying chariot and flew through the skies to Lanka. When the princes after having killed the golden deer and discovered it was a demon in disguise returned to their hut they found it empty and started to look for Sita.
During their wanderings the princes came upon a group of monkeys who showed them some ornaments of Sita : the monkeys had seen a beautiful lady crying and dropping her ornaments from a chariot in the sky that was being driven southwards by a demon.
Among the monkeys was Hanuman who ultimately located Sita whereabouts to be in Ravana kingdom in Lanka. Rama gained the help of the monkey chief Sugriva gathered a monkey army marched southwards built a bridge across the ocean and crossed over to Lanka. Rama after an epic battle was then able to kill Ravana and finally free Sita. When Sita walked up to Rama however he refused to accept her since she had been a living in a demon palace all this while. Hurt Sita entered into a burning pyre intending to give up her life. However Agni rose from the flames carrying an unhurt Sita in his arms and said: Here Rama is your Sita. She has not an iota of sin in her. (Valmiki Ramayana 6.118)
Since the 14 years were over by now Rama then returned to Ayodhya was crowned king and ruled the kingdom with great wisdom: no child died before their parents did no door needed locks against robbers no farmland lay barren no tree went fruitless and there was peace and prosperity all around.
The Ramayana as composed by Valmiki is thought to have six chapters and to end at this happy point. A seventh chapter called the Uttar-Ramayana (uttar = post after that which comes later) continues the story and ends on a slightly less happy note. This is how the story continues: After many months of Rama rule rumours began to surface among the populace regarding Sita chastity since she had been abducted and imprisoned by a demon. Mindful of the feelings of his subjects Rama asked Sita to undergo an Agni Pareeskha again. Sita refused whereupon Rama banished her. Lakshmana was deputed to escort her out of the kingdom; he did so unwillingly and left Sita near the hermitage of Valmiki. 
Sita was pregnant at that time. Valmiki took her in as an ashram inmate and Sita gave birth to her twins there: sons named Lava and Kusha whom Valmiki brought up with great love and affection teaching them princely skills such as archery as well as scholarly skills such as the Vedas and other scriptures. Valmiki also taught them to sing the Ramayana which he had finished composing by this time. The twins who were unaware of their parentage and hence unaware that they were singing about their own family would recite the poem at gatherings. They became so well-loved for their sweet recitation that their fame reached Rama ears who summoned them for a performance. It was here at Rama court that the true story was revealed to the twins: that they spitting images of the king were his sons and that their mother was none other than the Sita whom they sang of.
Rama in remorse asked Sita to return to the palace if she could prove her chastity again before an assembly. Sita in anguish cried out "O mother earth just take me away from this place forever!" Whereupon the ground parted the goddess Prithivi arose on a golden throne took Sita in her lap descended and the rift closed. Sita was forever lost. Griefstricken Rama decided to live no longer. He abdicated the throne in favour of his sons and along with his brothers entered the waters of the river Sarayu that skirted Ayodhya; their spirits left their bodies and ascended to the heavens.

The son of King Dasharatha and Queen Kaushalya Rama is the prince of Ayodya. He is an avatara of Vishnu the Blue God and the sustainer of worlds. He is also a virtuous strong and just man in his own right. He is married to Sita whom he loves deeply. He has a strong bond with his brother Lakshmana as well.
Sita father King Janaka found her lying in a furrow on sanctified ground and decided to raise her as his daughter. She marries Rama and loves him so much that she follows him into exile. She is famed for her virtue and beauty and is regarded as an avatara of the goddess Lakshmi Vishnu consort.
Ravana is a rakshasa who performed penance for the God Shiva for many years and in return received a great blessing from the God: he cannot be killed by any God demon or other divine being. His arrogance combined with great intelligence and power has led him to rule over much of the earth spreading terrible evil everywhere he goes.
Son of King Dasharatha and brother of Rama. He is deeply devoted to his brother whom he follows through many dangerous adventures and quests. He is married to Sita younger sister Urmila.
King of Ayodhya father of Rama Lakshmana  Bharatha and Shatrughna. Of all his three sons he loves Rama most deeply and tries to shelter the boy from any danger. He is a good king: kind just and well-liked by his people.
Vishwamitra is a great sage and wise man who was once a king. Through long meditation he gained a number of magical powers. He takes Rama on a quest to defeat a demon and to lift the bow of Shiva the first step in the future king great journey.
Ganga is a goddess the daughter of Himavan. Because of her incomparable beauty she was given to the Devas and she became the Milky Way. Later Shiva brought her down to earth and she became the river Ganges.
Shiva is part of the great trinity in Hindusim along with Vishnu and Brahma. He is a great ascetic and often sits in meditation. He is able to tame the power of other gods devas and supernatural beings and he often grants blessings and wishes to those who sit in dedication meditation ('tapasya'). His wife is Parvati.
Along with Kusha one of the youths to whom Valmiki taught the Ramayana was Lava. He is one of the sons of Rama but he does not know this.
Along with Lava one of the youths to whom Valmiki taught the Ramayana was Kushaa. He is one of the sons of Rama but he does not know this.
Vasishta was Guru to King Dasharatha he offers religious advice to the king and the royal family.
Kaikeyi is the third and youngest wife of King Dasharatha and mother of  Bharatha. She is famed for her beauty. After she saved the life of Dasharatha in battle he offered to grant anything she would ask of him. Kaikeyi later calls in this favor to have  Bharatha crowned king and Rama sent into the forest inspired by the worlds of her maid Manthara.
Sumitra is the Second wife of Dasharatha and is the mother of Lakshmana and Shatrughna.
Kaushalya is the first wife of Dasharatha and mother of Rama. She is the oldest wife and very kind and wise. She does not have a close relationship with her husband but she loves her son Rama very deeply.
Manthara is An old maid of Kaikeyi . She is a wicked woman and gives Kaikeyi the idea to ask Dasharatha to exile Rama and crown  Bharatha king instead.
Kaushalya is the Wife of Dasharatha mother of Rama. She is wise and kind but she is not close with her husband; the greatest joy in her life is Rama.
Bharata is the Son of King Dasharatha and Queen Kaikeyi he is half-brother to Rama Lakshmana and Shatrughna. He is devoted to his brother Rama and he tries desperately to undo the damage committed by his mother Kaikeyi.
Shatrughna is the Son of King Dasharatha and Queen Sumitra (she drank two sips from the sacred cup and consequently had twins). His twin brother is Lakshmana and his half-brothers are Rama and  Bharatha. He follows his brother  Bharatha everywhere.
Shurpanakha is The sister of Ravana she is a powerful rakshasi. She attempts to seduce Rama and kill Sita but the princely brothers attack her. She tries to muster the rakshasa army against Rama.
Maricha is A rakshasa uncle of Ravana. Rama defeated him with a purifying magical weapon and he renounced his evil ways to become a rishi.
Jatayu is A powerful golden eagle who speaks in the voice of a human being. He was loyal to King Dasharatha and pledges his service to Rama. Jatayu dies defending Sita from Ravana. Sugriva was usurped by his brother Vali and pledges his service to Rama and Lakshmana if they can restore him to his throne.
Hanuman is the Advisor to Sugriva. He is the son of the wind god Vayu and a vanari woman.
Angada is A vanara youth son of Vali and nephew of Sugriva. He is brave and intelligent.
Vibhishana is the Young brother of Ravana. Though he is a rakshasa he is wise and good. When Ravana refuses to listen to his counsel he joins Rama army.
Sampati is A great golden eagle brother of Jatayu. His wings were burned when he flew too close to the son.
Indrajit is The favorite son of Ravana and his most powerful warrior. He earned his name after he captured Indra the king of the gods.
Kumbhakarna is Ravana brother. He is a giant with infinite strength who sleeps for six months at a time before waking up and eating everything he can see.

Rama is the titular protagonist and the first son of King Dasharatha. Though in this story Rama is a human he actually an avatar of the god Vishnu who decided to take a human form in order to kill the evil rakshasa (demon) Ravana. Because of this Rama true identity is identifiable by his desire to rid the world of evil. He exceptionally strong and skilled in battle which is also an early clue to those around him that he an incarnation of Vishnu. Rama uses this strength to string Shiva bow and win Sita hand in marriage. Though every citizen of Kosala wants Rama to be king Rama demonstrates his intense loyalty and honor when he insists that Dasharatha uphold his promise to Kaikeyi one of his wives and crown Rama brother   Bharatha king instead. Rama retreats to the forests with Sita and his brother Lakshmana for 14 years during which time Rama battles demons and rakshasas. When Ravana kidnaps Sita Rama works closely with the monkeys of Kiskinda to rescue her. During the fight with Ravana Rama behaves honorably by allowing Ravana time to recover from fainting spells and even doubts the legitimacy and righteousness of his victory when he notices an injury on Ravana back and fears that he inflicted it while Ravana fled. Though Rama has a streak of jealousy and possessiveness especially when it comes to Sita (and even moreso in a later episode that is left out of this version of the epic) in general he is presented as the ideal hero and man
Sita is Rama wife and the incarnation of the goddess Lakshmi Vishnu wife—Sita was literally made for Rama. In the human world King Janaka found the infant Sita in a plowed field and raised her as his own. To protect her from unsuitable callers Janaka set the test that any man who wished to marry Sita must be able to string Shiva bow which is an impossible task for a simple mortal man. Sita represents the ideal wife and woman: she exceptionally loyal to her husband and follows him into exile; she beautiful even when she dressed in tree bark and under duress; and she passes every test of her faithfulness to Rama. Despite her positive qualities however Sita at times is vain petulant and disobedient. Her disobedience leads to her kidnapping by Ravana.
Lakshmana is Rama half brother and son to King Dasharatha. The two are very close and Lakshmana represents the ideal brother. He chooses to go with Rama when the sage Vishwamitra asks for Rama help as boys and when Rama is exiled Lakshmana chooses to go into exile with his brother. He extremely adept at fighting and Rama is also surprised to discover that Lakshmana is gifted with the skills of an architect. Lakshmana is however somewhat more emotionally driven than Rama is; at several points in the story Rama has to talk Lakshmana out of making rash or violent decisions without thinking them through. At other times Lakshmana shows that he equally as level-headed as his brother. Though he marries Sita sister Lakshmana wife doesn't factor into the story in a major capacity. Similarly though he a twin to Satrughna he much closer to Rama than his twin.

Ravana is a rakshasa (demon) with ten heads and ten sets of arms and is the king of the island Lanka. Long before Rama birth Ravana acquired powers from the gods Brahma and  Shiva through prayer and sacrifices. Because of this immense power Rama became evil and now wants to destroy the world and the gods and create havoc wherever he goes. Ravana is very lustful; he keeps many women in addition to his wife for his pleasure though he cursed to die if he touches a woman without her consent. His lust leads him to kidnap Sita after his sister Shurpanakha comes to him with stories of Sita beauty and Rama ferocity in protecting her. However because Sita resists Ravana Ravana digs under Sita feet and picks her up from the ground she stands on—so as to not touch her—and then imprisons her with a number of women who are tasked with breaking down Sita defenses to make her agree to marry Ravana. Rama finally kills Ravana by countering Ravana evil and destructive weapons with defensive weapons that provide strength and clarity.

Hanuman is a monkey who initially serves Sugriva. In his childhood Hanuman father told Hanuman to dedicate his life to serving Vishnu. Hanuman is the first monkey to realize that Rama is an incarnation of Vishnu and in following his father instructions Hanuman becomes one of Rama most trusted and loyal advisers. He also an excellent judge of character; he correctly judges Vibhishana Ravana brother as being loyal to Rama cause. Hanuman is also extremely powerful though he unaware of his powers for much of the story. When Hanuman is reminded of his great power he finds he capable of growing to a massive size and can step over the ocean in one step. He tasked with finding Sita in Lanka and keeps Sita from committing suicide out of despair. When Rama is finally crowned king in Ayodhya Hanuman chooses to stay with Rama and serve him.

Dasharatha is the emperor of Kosala and Rama father. He has three wives Kaushalya Kaikeyi and Sumithra none of whom have children but after offering specific sacrifices he has four sons: Rama Lakshmana Satrughna and   Bharatha. Dasharatha cares deeply for all four of his children and resists Vishwamitra request to take Rama on a journey to protect him. However Dasharatha is extremely dutiful and finally agrees to Vishwamitra wishes. Later when Dasharatha realizes that he getting quite old and should pick a successor he chooses Rama to succeed him. When Kaikeyi insists that Dasharatha crown her son  Bharatha instead of Rama to fulfill a boon he granted her years ago Dasharatha feels he has no choice but to agree though agreeing to this leads to Dasharatha death.

Sugriva is a monkey from Kiskinda. His brother Vali banished him from the kingdom because he believed that Sugriva tried to usurp the crown though Sugriva remained honorable and loyal to his brother claim. Sugriva asks Rama for help in killing Vali but feels extremely guilty when their plan works and Vali dies. As the king of Kiskinda Sugriva gives himself over to material pleasures and spends his time drinking alcohol and enjoying the company of beautiful women causing him to ignore the promise he made to Rama to provide an army to search for Sita. When Sugriva is made to see the error of his ways though he vows to give up alcohol and becomes one of Rama greatest and most loyal allies in the fight against Ravana.

Vali is the initial king of the monkeys in Kiskinda. He a very powerful being in his own right but he also has the special power of being nearly invincible. When someone wishes to fight Vali they give up half their power to Vali making him even stronger. However this power makes Vali an unwilling listener. He banishes his brother Sugriva because he was unwilling to listen to Sugriva truthful account of a past event and instead Vali chose to believe that Sugriva wanted to usurp him. This lack of rational and considerate thought leads Rama to side with Sugriva and kill Vali without listening to Vali version of events. However as Vali dies Rama convinces him that even though he a monkey he is capable of accessing and using a more nuanced and human system of conduct and thought. This allows Vali to find eternal peace in the afterworld.

  Bharatha is the son of Dasharatha and Kaikeyi. Like his brothers  Bharatha is a skilled warrior and exceptionally thoughtful. He is extremely angry when he hears that Kaikeyi forced Dasharatha to name him as the next emperor of Kosala instead of Rama.  Bharatha attempts to bring Rama back from exile through a philosophical debate but Rama insists that  Bharatha follow their father wishes and rule until Rama returns from exile.  Bharatha agrees but rather than rule as an emperor he places Rama sandals on the throne and rules as a regent from a settlement outside the capital city. When Rama returns from exile  Bharatha gladly transfers power to his brother.

Kaikeyi is Dasharatha favorite wife and the mother of   Bharatha. Though she a kind and generous woman at heart her companion  Manthara encourages Kaikeyi to behave jealously and blackmail Dasharatha into crowning  Bharatha king instead of Rama. Kaikeyi is able to do this because she saved Dasharatha life years ago and he granted her a boon in thanks which she chose to redeem at a later date. When Rama returns from exile Kaikeyi accepts him as the rightful king and appears to have realized the error of her earlier actions.

King Janaka is Sita adoptive father and the king of Mithila. He cares deeply for Sita and to protect her from possibly having to marry an unworthy man he declares that any suitor must be able to string Shiva bow a massive bow and a family heirloom. Though he fears Sita might never marry because of this he feels that he cannot go against his word and do away with the condition.

Shurpanakha is Ravana demoness sister. Though her demon form is horrific with long fangs a distended belly and wild hair she also capable of assuming the form of a beautiful woman. She falls madly in love with Rama and consequently becomes extremely jealous of Sita. When she won't leave Rama alone Lakshmana cuts off her ears nose and breasts.

 Manthara is a hunchback woman and one of Kaikeyi companions. When Rama was a child he made fun of her deformities and threw clay balls at her which causes Manthara to harbor ill will towards Rama for the rest of her life. To take revenge Manthara encourages Kaikeyi to use her promised boons from Dasharatha to banish Rama to the forest for 14 years. She convinces Kaikeyi that if Rama becomes king he'll treat Kaikeyi badly.

Vishnu is one of the gods that make up the Hindu Trinity (alongside  Shiva and Brahma). Vishnu is referred to as the protector. In his divine form he carries a conch and a wheel and rests on the coils of a serpent. Lakshmi is his wife. Vishnu agrees to incarnate as Rama in order to destroy Ravana and the other rakshasas.

Jatayu is a great eagle and was at one point a dear friend of Dasharatha. When he comes across Rama Lakshmana and Sita in the forest he vows to stay alive and protect them until Rama exile comes to an end. Ravana kills him when Jatayu tries to prevent Ravana from abducting Sita.

Maricha is Thataka son and Ravana uncle. Though he a demon he attempts to correct his life by giving up his violent ways and praying. When Ravana threatens him however Maricha agrees to help abduct Sita. Maricha is correct in believing that this decision will be the end of him: Rama shoots and kills him.

Kaikeyi is Dasharatha favorite wife and the mother of  Bharatha. Though she a kind and generous woman at heart her companion Manthara encourages Kaikeyi to behave jealously and blackmail Dasharatha into crowning  Bharatha king instead of Rama. Kaikeyi is able to do this because she saved Dasharatha life years ago and was rewarded for her kindness with a boon in thanks which she chose to redeem at a later date. When Rama returns from exile Kaikeyi accepts him as the rightful king and appears to have realized the error of her earlier actions
King  Janaka is Sita adoptive father and the king of Mithila. He cares deeply for Sita and to protect her from possibly having to marry an unworthy man declares that any suitor must be able to string Shiva bow a massive bow and a family heirloom. Though Janaka fears that his daughter might never marry because of this he feels that he cannot go against his word and do away with the condition.
Kaushalya was the eldest consort of King Dasharatha among his three wives the mother of Lord Rama and the eldest queen of Ayodhya in the Indian epic the Ramayana.
Kaushalya shared a sisterly relationship with her husband wives Sumitra and Kaikeyi .She tells Sumitra about Kaikeyi that you both are like my sisters. 
Rama leaving for fourteen years of exile from Ayodhya. Rama his wife and brother dressed in the clothes of bark that Kaikeyi has made them put on ride off in a chariot driven by Sumantra and surrounded by the townspeople. Dasharatha emerges from his palace and goes through the gate of the city surrounded by his queens. Dasharatha and Kaushalya according to Valmiki text hurry after the chariot until Rama unable to bear the sight has to tell Sumantra to quicken his pace so that they would be left behind. Queen Kaushalya was the incarnation of Dhara and she gives boon from lord Vishnu . 

When Rama is exiled Shatrughna attacks Manthara but he is restrained by Bharatha who feels that Rama would not approve.
 goes to Rama and asks him to come back to Ayodhya but Rama refuses. Bharatha rules Ayodhya from NandigRamam and is an excellent leader often referred to as the avatar of dharma. Though Bharatha was the king designate of Ayodhya during Rama exile it was Shatrughna helped him take care of the administration of the whole kingdom during Rama absence and he was also was the only solace for the three Queen mothers during the absence of his brothers from Ayodhya


In the Ramayana Hanuman encounters Lankini at the gates of Lanka. Hanuman not wanting to reveal his mission cleverly replies that he has come from the forest desiring to see the famed city of Lanka and its beauty. However Lankini senses an intruder and she attacks Hanuman. Knowing that Lankini is a woman he softly strikes her back just enough to make her fall and bleed. A dazed and confused Lankini immediately realizes her opponent is no mere monkey and asks for forgiveness knowing that Brahma prophecy has come true. Hanuman forgivess her as he prepares to continue the quest into Lanka leaving Lankini behind who is now free of the curse. 

Lankini was a powerful Rakshasi whose name literally means "The Deity of Lanka" as she was the female personification of the city itself and was the guardian to the doors of Lanka.
Lankini was once the guardian of the abode of Brahma and she became arrogant and egoistic about her position and she treated others in the palace with contempt due to which she was cursed by Brahma to guard the city of Rakshasas forever. Lankini realized her mistake and begged for forgiveness but instead Brahma gave her a boon she will be freed of the curse only when a monkey will defeat her in combat and thus bring to end the age of Rakshasas.

Urmila is a character in the Hindu epic Ramayana and she was the younger sister of Sita. Urmila was wife of Lakshmana younger brother of Rama. They had two sons - Angada and Chandraketu. Ahalya Urmila was ready to accompany her husband into exile but Lakshmana asked her to stay back in Ayodhya. Urmila is notable for her unparalleled sacrifice called Urmila Nidra.
British satirist Aubrey Menen says that Valmiki was "recognized as a literary genius " and thus was considered "an outlaw " presumably because of his "philosophic scepticism "[7] as part of an "Indian Enlightenment" period.[8] Valmiki is also quoted to be the contemporary of Rama. Menen claims Valmiki is "the first author in all history to bring himself into his own composition."[9] Rama met Valmiki during his period of exile and interacted with him. Valmiki gave shelter to Sita in his hermitage when Rama banished her. Kusha and Lava the twin sons of Shri Rama were born to Sita in this hermitage. Valmiki taught Ramayana to Kusha and Lava who later sang the divine story in Ayodhya during the Ashwamedha yajna congregation to the pleasure of the audience whereupon King Rama questioned who they were and later visited Valmiki hermitage to confirm if Sita the two children claimed as their mother was in fact his wife in exile. Later he summoned Kusha and Lava to the court where they sang the story of Rama there and Rama confirmed that whatever had been sung by these two children was entirely true
Ahalya was once a beautiful woman who was cursed by her husband and turned into a rock. Ahalya would only attain moksha if an avatar of vishnu blessed her. When Rama steps on Ahalya, she turns back into a woman and prays to him. Vishwamitra is the one who tells Rama and Lakshmana the sad story of Ahalya doom.
While searching for Sita Rama and Lakhmana meet Shabari. Shabari is a big devotee of Lord Rama is very hospitable and tastes all the fruits to ensure they are sweet before giving them to Rama.








